add Observability Logs data ingestion (#2308)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/tutorials/observability/data-ingestion/logs/_index.md

---
title: Ingest logs into the Observability Platform
linkTitle: Logs
description: How to make new logs available in the Observability Platform in self-service.
menu:
  principal:
    parent: tutorials-observability-data-ingestion
    identifier: tutorials-observability-data-ingestion-logs
weight: 50
last_review_date: 2024-10-09
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
user_questions:
  - How to ingest new logs?
  - Why do my clusters run Alloy?
---

> By default, Giant Swarm clusters starting from release v29.0.0 are equipped with [Alloy](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy), it's a lightweight, high-performance log agent that collects system logs from your cluster and forwards them to a central [Loki](https://grafana.com/docs/loki) instance running on the management cluster.

Reviewer: Alloy is a multi-purpose telemetry agent and not only for logs right ?

Author: True, I replaced this

> By default, Giant Swarm clusters starting from release v29.0.0 are equipped with [Alloy](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy), it's a lightweight, high-performance OpenTelemetry collector. It's configured to collects system logs from your cluster and forwards them to a central [Loki](https://grafana.com/docs/loki) instance running on the management cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, Giant Swarm clusters starting from release v29.0.0 are equipped with [Alloy](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy), a lightweight, high-performance `OpenTelemetry` collector. It's configured to collect system logs from your cluster and forward them to a central [`Loki`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki) instance running on the management cluster.
```

> The Giant Swarm Observability Platform allows you to ingest logs from your workloads in a self-service way using labels to select which pods to ingest logs from.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The observability platform allows you to ingest logs from your workloads in a self-service way using labels to select which pods to ingest logs.
```
For consistency, we are using lower case

### Label your resources

The label `giantswarm.io/logging` can be set to `true` or `false` on any Namespace or Pod. When the label isn't set it's considered `false`.

> - Pods in any namespace can be labeled

Reviewer: I sée no notion that self service is only available starting from a cluster version when this would at least bé in 29.5.0 right ?

Author: It's mostl likely be v30, I added that

> From release v30.0.0 the label `giantswarm.io/logging` can be set to `true` or `false` on any Namespace or Pod to select targets to collect logs from. When the label isn't set it's considered `false`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From release `v30.0.0`, the label `giantswarm.io/logging` can be set to `true` or `false` on any namespace or pod to select targets to collect logs from. When the label isn't set, it's considered `false`.
```

- Namespace can be labeled, the value used for the namespace will be the default for all pods in this namespace
- Pods label take precedence over Namespace label. For example logging can be enabled for a pod in a namespace where logging is disabled and vice versa.

> ||Pod `giantswar.io/logging=true`|Pod `giantswar.io/logging=false`|Pod `unset`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
||Pod `giantswarm.io/logging=true`|Pod `giantswarm.io/logging=false`|Pod `unset`
```

|-|------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------

> **Namespace** `giantswar.io/logging=true`|<i class="fas fa-check"></i>|<i class="fas fa-times"></i>|<i class="fas fa-check"></i>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Namespace** `giantswarm.io/logging=true`|<i class="fas fa-check"></i>|<i class="fas fa-times"></i>|<i class="fas fa-check"></i>
```

**Namespace** `giantswar.io/logging=false`|<i class="fas fa-check"></i>|<i class="fas fa-times"></i>|<i class="fas fa-times"></i>
**Namespace** `unset`|<i class="fas fa-check"></i>|<i class="fas fa-times"></i>|<i class="fas fa-times"></i>

You can use the following command to label a namespace or a pod:

> ```bash

Reviewer: I really think we should push for gitOps on public documentation so the kubectl command IS not useful

Author: How can I achieve the same thing with git ops ?

Reviewer: Customer label their namespace in git :)

Reviewer 3: So it would be something like   
\> In the default way you can label a namespace in your git repository. Alternatively you can use the following command to label a namespace or a pod. 

or something like that, hm? I think this is still an intersting information how to do it alternatively.

Author: Added the mention about the git way.

kubectl label namespace <namespace> giantswarm.io/logging=true
kubectl label pod <pod> giantswarm.io/logging=true
```

> Logs lines can then be viewed in Grafana Explore, learn more about this in [Exploring logs with LogQL]({{< relref "/tutorials/observability/data-exploration/exploring-logs" >}}).

Reviewer: Should we explain what labels are added automatically and so on?

Author: I have no opinion on this, but if we do it here we should also do it on the metrics page then.

Reviewer 3: Oh yeah that's a good idea. Like

> Per default log ingestion is enabled for the namespaces   
> \- kubesystem  
> \- giantswarm

or something like that?   
Maybe we also need a disclaimer with   
\> These labels should not be overwritten or we cannot guarantee the operational safety of the clusters

something like that? wdyt?

Author: Added a section to describe default namespaces and our PodLogs resources that should not be overwritten

Author: We agreed to go with PodLogs only.

> Logs lines can then be viewed in Grafana Explore, learn more about this in [Exploring logs with LogQL]({{< relref "/tutorials/observability/data-exploration/exploring-logs" >}}).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Logs lines can then be viewed in `Grafana`UI on the `Explore` page; learn more about this in [Exploring logs with LogQL]({{< relref "/tutorials/observability/data-exploration/exploring-logs" >}}).
```

### Performances considerations

> Keep in mind that ingesting new logs into the Observability Platform comes with a cost. The resource consumption of the central Loki is related to the amount of logs it has to handle. This means ingesting more logs also leads to higher resource consumption of the Observability Platform overall. Also note that logs are tailed through Kubernetes API which has an impact on network traffic and CPU consumption of Kubernetes API server pods.

Reviewer: Alloy will also use more resources on WCs right ?

Author: Yes right

> Keep in mind that ingesting new logs into the Observability Platform comes with a cost. The resource consumption of the central Loki is related to the amount of logs it has to handle. This means ingesting more logs also leads to higher resource consumption of the Observability Platform overall. Also note that logs are tailed through Kubernetes API on the cluster which has an impact on network traffic and CPU consumption of Kubernetes API server pods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Keep in mind that ingesting new logs into the observability platform comes with a cost. The resource consumption of the central `Loki` is related to the amount of logs it has to handle. This means ingesting more logs also leads to higher resource consumption of the observability platform overall. Also note that logs are tailed through Kubernetes API on the cluster, impacting network traffic and CPU consumption of the API server pods.
```

  - Why do my clusters run Alloy?
---

> By default, Giant Swarm clusters starting from release v29.0.0 are equipped with [Alloy](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy), it's a lightweight, high-performance log agent that collects system logs from your cluster and forwards them to a central [Loki](https://grafana.com/docs/loki) instance running on the management cluster.

Reviewer: Is 29.0.0 accurate? I thought it was at least 19.1.0?
